so hello everybody I thought I'd have
another look at the origin of the
elements and uh this is really an
improved version of an earlier talk uh
hopefully the sound is also much better
because there was significant problems
on the earlier version so let's uh uh
get
moving so where do the elements of the
periodic table come from well they're
created by nuclear fusion this is the
source for stars and when temperature
and pressure are high enough fast moving
particles can overcome their Mutual
electrical repulsion and get together
and fuse to create heavier nuclei often
releasing energy and that can be the
power source for
stars but it started in the Big Bang in
the Big Bang there was this very very
hot dense State expanding outwards as
space was expanding and as it expanded
the temp tempure was declining from
obscenely high levels down to uh just
very extreme ones to begin with in fact
it dropped below a billion degrees after
a fairly short period of time and
continued for about another three
minutes down to 10
million and in that three
minutes the hydrogen that had been
created in the very first instance of
time was able to carry out nuclear
fusion the hydrogen nuclei were packed
together hot enough and dense enough to
Ram into each other and Fus together to
make helium and in that time about a
quarter of the hydrogen was turned into
helium so we ended up with 75% hydrogen
25% helium and almost nothing of
anything else a little tiny bit of heavy
hydrogen dyum as we'll
see and so this C is the one that drives
it all it's what's going on inside the
cores of ordinary
Stars those can reach 10 million degrees
which is the critical temperature to for
the particles to have enough energy to
collide and stick you can get the
hydrogen nuclei close enough together
the two red blobs the protons the
hydrogen nuclei can hit each other and
fuse to form a heavy hydrogen nucleus
one of the protons gets converted into a
neutron in the process and the positive
charge is spat out as an anti-electron
which is then destroyed um you can then
hit that with another hydrogen and make
helium 3 and then do all that twice take
two helium 3es Ram them together and you
can make helium 4 and two protons are
spat back out so you started with six
protons going in and you got two out
leaving four particles to make up the
hel iium
nucleus and you can see that the first
step is very slow it takes a billion
years on average for two hydrogens to
get together and fuse um fortunately
there are so many hydrogen nuclei that
uh this process uh although it is slow
individually on average the actual rate
is pretty
high but the next step the duu terium to
helium 3 the average time for that only
1 second so that's almost in
instantaneous and that dyum is almost
all completely used up very rapidly as
it's created that's why there isn't very
much of it
around and the helium 3 well that gets
converted to helium 4 on a time scale of
a million years so a thousand times
faster than the first step but uh still
a reasonable amount of helium 3 resulted
um from this sort of
process now if you're is a little bit
larger than the smallest ones the red
dwarf stars and our sun qualifies for
this the core can be just hot enough can
get up to 15 million and at 15 million
another process is possible provided
you've already got some carbon um the
carbon must have been created in earlier
generations of stars and then
redistributed to collapse to form new
stars and our sun has a about 1.3% of
elements other than hydrogen and helium
and quite a significant proportion of
that is carbon and so when the carbon is
in the core it can trigger off this
catalytic cycle the CNO cycle carbon
nitrogen
oxygen you can have the carbon 12
nucleus the ordinary form of carbon can
absorb a hydrogen nucleus a proton and
form nitrogen 13
nitrogen 13 is radioactively unstable it
spits out one of these green particles
that's a an anti-electron dumping one of
the positive charges turning itself back
into carbon and some energy gets
released but it's carbon 13 this time
it's got one more mass
unit if you add a hydrogen to that
because carbon 13 is fairly long lived
and
stable you can get nitrogen 14 and
that's stable as well and so that can
around long enough to pick up another
hydrogen and make oxygen
15 now oxygen 15 that's unstable as well
it spits out an anti-electron a positron
dumps a positive charge and becomes
nitrogen 15 which is also reasonably
stable and lives long enough to pick up
another hydrogen and form well it would
form Oxygen 16 at that point if you do
the maap
an Oxygen 16 should be
stable but this version isn't because
it's got a lot of extra energy as a
result of the way it's been made and so
it spits out a helium
nucleus and turns itself into carbon 12
instead it's an excited state of oxygen
that has so much energy that just bursts
apart into these two daughter nuclei and
so we get our carbon back and we've
turned four hydrogens that we absorbed
on the way around the loop into a bunch
of energy and a helium
nucleus just like you do in the proton
proton chain reaction only at 15 million
degrees this actually goes um at about
the same rate and if you get a bit
hotter the hotter you get the faster
this goes and so the uh soon takes over
and becomes the dominant process in
stars that are significantly larger than
the Sun
now when the star has used a lot of its
hydrogen and dumped all the helium into
the core it usually swells up into a red
giant and has hydrogen Fusion still
going on in the Shell around the core
but the inner helium core is squeezed
and crushed down and the pressure and
temperature inside goes Higher and
Higher and when it reaches 100 million
degrees provided the Stars massive
enough then the helium nuclei can start
to fuse together they need this extra
push because they have uh two positive
charges so they really don't like each
other at all and it takes a lot of
pressure and temperature to squeeze them
into close enough range to fuse when
they do they make a burum 8
nucleus now that burum 8 that's also in
an excited state and it really doesn't
like to exist pilum 8 is highly unstable
and it will fall apart back to two
heliumsuckers
even though it's actually in an excited
state it's got too much energy ordinary
carbon 12 is a nice stable nucleus but
this forms an excited version of carbon
12 but a happy one um Fred ho predicted
that this would be the case that there
would be a resonant energy there to
catch the bili 8 helium for Fusion
otherwise you just couldn't see how uh
carbon was being created at all and he
was right um this was the then
subsequently
measured now instead of falling apart
that carbon nucleus is is stable enough
stabilized by this resonance to be able
to Decay and dump its energy in various
ways to form ordinary carbon 12 so by
this triple Alpha process helium gets
converted into
carbon now if you have even hotter stars
then you can Ram helium into the carbon
you've made and make oxygen you can Ram
another one into the oxygen and make
neon and you can do the same with neon
and make magnesium you can climb your
way up the periodic table two steps at a
time in this way and one of the things
that's important here is how stable the
product nucleus is an Oxygen 16 with
eight protons and eight neutrons is a
very stable nucleus these are both magic
numbers as they're called in terms of
nuclear stability the energy shells
within the nucleus like to have eight
items um in order to form closed shells
so you get a lot of oxygen made by this
process in fact here's a bunch of the
reactions that occur we can see these
you've got carbon to oxygen oxygen to
neon neon to magnesium silicon sulfur
argon all the way on up to the last step
there where iron is converted into
nickel 56 and at each step you're going
to get some energy out in fact you get
roughly the same amount of energy it's
uh quite often about six s or eight
million electron volts worth of energy
that you're getting out you can see
actually the oxygen step uh oxygen to
Neon is a bit on the low side you don't
get quite so much energy there but uh
round about the same but it's the same
in absolute terms not the same if you
divide by the number of particles that
you're using in the process so uh 8 / 56
is a lot less than 8 / 16 at the top of
the table there and so you would find
that the efficiency of the energy
release is getting
worse whereas of course the gravity is
directly related to the number of
particles that to the mass and so
gravity is gradually getting stronger in
comparison to the energy release Here
which is of course important in
controlling what ultimately happens to
Stars so in summary these are the
processes that we have going on we have
the proton proton reaction creating
helium that can be accelerated by the
CNO cycle in hotter dirtier Stars the
original Stars couldn't do that they
didn't have any
carbon but if you are a dense enough hot
enough core so in a giant star either a
red giant or a very large star you can
get your uh core hot enough to fuse
helium to carbon using the triple Alpha
process and then you can start climbing
the alpha ladder as it's known uh drawn
on this circular part of the diagram you
can go carbon oxygen neon magnesium
silicon sulfur argon calcium titanium
chromium iron nickel and end up at
nickel 56 now nickel 56 is radioactive
it's an unstable isotope of nickel and
so it turns into Cobalt and then iron
and you get a lot of iron 56 formed
that's the stable version this is
because gradually you need more neutrons
to balance your protons as your nuclei
getting heavier so things begin to shift
a little bit and what this does is it
creates all the even numbered elements
up to and including iron and nickel
there on the tight
diagram you can see the increasing
number of protons Zed the atomic number
across the bottom there all the way from
hydrogen at one up to uranium with
92 and you can see that the zigzag
pattern is telling us that the even
numbered ones are favored most of the
time uh you can see actually burum is
appalling uh right down at the bottom
there and that's why that triple Alpha
process has to be so lucky to to jump
burum direct to carbon bear in mind this
is a log scale so one unit up the uh
axis on the left hand side there is 10
times as much um and so you can see that
the amount of oxygen is uh more than 10
times the amount of nitrogen and way
more than the amount of Florine that's
the next odd-numbered element and so the
odd-numbered ones get created by a
different method but they uh are much
rarer so in truly massive stars you can
do these processes that create
um some of the elements directly we got
the one at the top there part of the
alpha ladder where we're adding a helium
but if it's really really massive you
can start smashing two carbons together
you can smash a carbon and an oxygen
together and make silicon two oxygens to
make sulfur for two silicons uh can be
rammed together to make iron 56 directly
so you start to cook up these heavier
Elements by a number of other processes
involving the ones you've already
managed to
make and now one Quirk there is that the
middle lower one two oxygens 16 o plus
16 o is producing 31 s should produce 32
s if you add two 16s together and what's
happened here is it spat out a neutron
on the diagram now that happens again
because you create
32s and it's unstable it's got too much
energy it's an excited version of the
nucleus and it dumps the energy by
spitting out a
neutron so if we look at the amount of
energy bound up in the nucleus uh we can
see why we can climb from hydrogen up
through helium and carbon up to iron
gradually getting more and more of this
binding energy released to us um and
it's an energetically favorable process
to climb up there to make iron you can
also see that beyond that things get
worse again it slopes downwards and in
fact in our nuclear reactors we take
uranium 238 and split it to climb
backwards to the left on the diagram to
go up the slope to um smaller nuclei to
release energy that way and so the
natural product of all of this in an
equilibrium situation would be that
everything would get turned to iron um
of course things are far from
equilibrium a diagram of the a 25 solar
mass star reveals a little bit more
about this you get these shells of
different layers at different pressures
and and temperatures getting hotter and
denser towards the center but uh the
star will first turn hydrogen to helium
and that will buy it enough heat
generation over time to last 7 million
years helium will be turned to carbon
and release more energy but it only buys
about five uh 500,000
years half a million
years before that's exhausted
and of course gravity is continuing to
try and crush the star at all all
occasions carbon burning kicks off and
that lasts just 600 years neon burning
one year oxygen six months and silicon
converting to iron directly just buys
you one day and at that point you've run
out of options um your star is in real
trouble at this point now if you're
really following you'll notice that
oxygen and neon are in the order here in
terms of their atomic number and atomic
weight oxygen is lighter than neon it's
uh 16 mass units carbon is 12 Oxygen 16
neon is next at 20 but because again
oxygen is so stable the burning of
oxygen is delayed until after the
burning of
neon now I mentioned that in a really
hot star core you can smash two carbons
together and get magnesium 24 out of it
12 + 12 makes 24 this makes perfect
sense but again the Magnesium is created
in an excited state with excess energy
contained in the nucleus and is not very
pleased or happy about that so it will
uh try to do something to dump that
excess energy that it's carrying
away and what it will do is
Decay it can spit out a helium nucleus
creating neon 20 or it can spit out a
proton and create sodium 23 so that's
where one of our odd numbered elements
comes from or it can just spit out a
neutron and turn itself into magnesium
23 as well and this is another of these
examples like the one we saw earlier of
neutrons being
emitted now neutrons become very
important for the next
processes if you have free
created by some of these side reactions
flying around they will crash into
nuclei and make them one mass unit
heavier now that might result in um a
more stable nucleus in which case it's
all good but more often than not it
creates an unstable one which will then
Decay by spitting out an electron
turning a neutron into a proton and
electron you get a positive proton
remains in the nucleus and a negative
electron hurtles away and what that's
done is promoted the nucleus to be the
next element on the periodic table so if
it was an even numbered one it's now an
odd-numbered one and this is where the
odd-numbered ones come from they come
from the neutron capture
reactions and we call the process that
creates a lot of these the S process
the SP for stands for slow because you
slowly accumulate one Neutron after
another and there's an interesting
little example of this there are many
many cases but this one is that common
ion 56 picks up a neutron becomes ion 57
then 58 then 59 but 59 is very unstable
and dumps an electron to become cobalt
59 so the mass stays the same but the
atomic number goes down by one so we've
created an odd numbered element and in
fact you can get a ladder of these the
Cobalt can then pick up nuclei and
become Cobalt 60 if it picks up a
neutron and and so on and it can zigzag
along the periodic table making the
elements one at a time all the way along
until it gets to this point here so what
we have here is uh We've skipped forward
to he uh HG G which is Mercury and
Mercury 2011 picks up a neutron Mercury
202 picks up another
Neutron would be Mercury 203 but that's
unstable so it uh spits out an
electron gains a proton in the process
of of converting the neutron and becomes
thalium
203 that can pick up a neutron but
that's unstable as well
and so it can then do the same trick
dump a an electron convert a proton into
a neutron and become lead
204 and Lead 204 well that can go by
picking up a neutron to 205 206 207 lead
208 those are all reasonably
stable
um but lead 208 going to lead 209 again
the same thing happens you convert a
neutron into a proton and an electron
spit the electron out and it turns into
bismuth
209 bisou 209 picks up a neutron and now
it's in trouble because it's formed uh
to bismuth 210 that spits out an
electron turns itself into polonium 210
and you may have heard of paloni 210
it's an extremely dangerous element
highly unstable
and it decays back by spitting out an
alpha particle and so it goes two steps
to the left and down two rows on the
diagram back to lead 206 where it came
from and so what's happening here is
we're turning uh we turn four of these
Neutron captures into a helium nucleus
um but we don't get past polonium it's
rather like a game of snakes and ladders
this entire process keep uh moving
forward one and occasionally get to go
up a ladder when you spit out an
electron and climb up the uh atomic
number scale The Zed scale making new
elements and then you keep moving to the
right until you have to do it again uh
but unfortunately when you get to
polonium you're out of options because
polonium 210 decays by this different
process spitting out a an alpha particle
a helium nucleus and so the S Pro says
can't get past this point um it ends up
stuck in a
loop but when really massive stars have
made a fully dense iron core and start
trying to do reactions with the iron
directly they're in trouble the energy
output ceases the core switches off and
it is crushed by the gravity so much
that the electrons and protons are all
rammed together in the core creating
neutrons the uh whole thing shrinks down
the outer layers start falling in but in
the process of making those neutrons the
electron plus proton reaction creating a
neutron also releases a storm of
neutrinos um and a lot of gamma rays and
all of the energy of the neutrinos and
the gamma rays streaming out from the
forming neutrons star in the
center hits the infalling outer layers
of the star and blasts it apart in a
supernova but that Supernova is also
subjected to a blizzard of neutrons not
all the neutrons end up in the neutron
star in the middle a lot of them get
blasted out through the envelope and the
flux of neutrons in this sort of event
is many many many orders of magnitude
greater than
occurs normally from those nuclear side
reactions in the center of the the star
and so you can create What's called the
r process the rapid repeated Neutron
capture process there are so many
neutrons that your nucleus just gets hit
by one after another after another and
there isn't time for the relatively slow
beta decay of spitting out an electron
to happen uh before you've managed to
rack up a whole lot of neutrons being
added so this creates very very Neutron
Rich
nuclei as shown in the diagram there
we've actually hit this nucleus with
four neutrons turning it into a a very
Neutron Rich uh nucleus but you can do
that up to a point because nuclei quite
like Having excess neutrons over the
number of protons but not too many if
you have too many it hits What's called
the neutron drip line and and bad things
start to happen
um So eventually they will become
radioactive and Decay but in the process
you can add quite a few Mass numbers to
your nucleus and if you add enough you
can jump over gaps in the process like
the one that's created at poonian you
could skip over it and do mult add
multiple neutrons that then Decay with
multiple beta decays and skip over
creating the heavier ele El and that's
how the really heavy ones up to uranium
get
created and that happens in neutron
stars as sorry sorry in supern noi where
they create neutron stars but it also
happens when you Collide binary neutron
stars together sometimes a pair of
massive stars will both form a neutron
star and they will spiral together
dumping their angular momentum and
energy of orbit by emitting things like
gravity waves and other processes and
they will eventually collide with each
other now when two neutron stars collide
there's a humongous explosion called a
kilonova and uh this of course leads to
a absolute blizzard of neutrons and so
again you can trigger the r process and
we reckon that about half the lead
uranium and gold in the universe is
created in large stars and about half of
it maybe a little bit more in colliding
neutron stars in kilon
noi and so we end up with this table
here the periodic table of the elements
colored according to where the stars um
sorry where the elements are made
whether it's in stars or in other events
so hydrogen and helium well all the
hydrogen is made in the Big Bang most of
the helium is made in the Big Bang so
those are colored blue and then we have
in yellow exploding massive stars making
uh a lot of the uh mediumweight
elements and then the merging of neutron
stars and uh are making a lot of the
ones colored in purple there now there
are some other processes when a small
low mass star dies that can also create
some of the medium weight um and
slightly heavier elements and that's
colored in in green but again it's the r
and s processes that are responsible
exploding white dwarfs same answer that
can make a number of the transition
metals and some silicon sulfur argon
things like that um and then we have
labeled on this diagram the ones in gray
that we do not find present on the earth
so things Beyond neon plutonium there
amorium and so forth those are all
labeled in Gray because we have to make
those a few atoms at a time in our
nuclear
reactors and then you have technitium
and
promethium the Oddball elements that
have no stable isotopes and again we
make those in nuclear reactors uh to use
them for medical purposes and to study
um now I've actually got another talk
that you might be interested in about uh
very special star pisil star and that
seems to contain some of these weird
elements technitium promethium even
Einsteinium element number 99 there and
so although we say on this diagram that
human synthesis has been that that has
created them it seems Nature has found
ways to make them and we don't really
understand how and with that I'll leave
it there so thank thank you again very
much for listening I hope you've enjoyed
this improved version of the uh origin
of the elements of the universe thanks
very much